CS7IS2: Artificial Intelligence Assignment 3 
 
In this assignment you will implement Minimax and Reinforcement Learning algorithms for playing 2 
games, Tic Tac Toe and Connect 4, and compare their performance. This assignment is worth 35% of 
your overall CS7IS2 mark.  
Please note this is an individual assignment. You are allowed to discuss ideas with your colleagues 
but do not share code. Any suspected plagiarism will be dealt with in line with University policies 
https://www.tcd.ie/teaching-learning/academic-policies/plagiarism/ 
Submissions are via Blackboard, and due by Friday April 3rd 5pm.  
You have an option to penalty-free submit assignment until Sunday April 5th evening (midnight) but 
please note there will be no Blackboard/email/TA/lecturer support for assignment or any other 
technical issues past the official deadline. Any requests for extensions (on medical or other similarly 
serious grounds) have to be received before the official deadline.  
Assignments submitted later than Sunday 6th will be lowered by 33% of the achieved mark per day.  
Assignment specification: 
1. Implement in Python (or reuse existing open source) games of Tic Tac Toe and Connect 4 
2. Implement Minimax algorithm (both with and without alpha-beta pruning) and Q-learning 
Reinforcement Learning (both tabular and deep DQN variant) algorithms for playing each of 
the two games above  
3. Implement a default opponent that will play these games against your algorithms. It does 
not have to be very advanced but it has to be better than fully random (eg, opponent must 
select a winning move if it exists. It must select a blocking move (i.e. prevent opponent from 
winning) if it exists. 
4. Write a document that compares the following, presenting graphs and analysis/conclusions, 
making sure you let agents play a sufficient number of games to be able to draw 
conclusions: 
o How do your algorithms compare to each other when playing against default 
opponent in Tic Tac Toe 
o How do your algorithms compare to each other when playing against default 
opponent in Connect 4 
o How do your algorithms compare to each other when playing against each other in 
Tic Tac Toe 
o How do your algorithms compare to each other when playing against each other in 
Connect 4 
o How do your algorithms compare to each other overall 
5. Record a brief (max 5 minutes) screen-grab (and if required voiceover) video demo of your 
games (showing input parameters, output screens etc) 
  
Important scalability note and instructions 
You’ll notice that connect 4 problem is a lot more complex than tic-tac-toe, due to the number of 
states to visit/maximum length of the game (9 vs 42 moves). Executing connect 4 minimax will not 
be feasible on your machine. First confirm this, by executing it for eg 30 minutes and counting how 
many moves (out of how many max moves) did it visit (reporting the findings, both with and without 
alpha-beta pruning). From this point on, there are multiple ways to proceed – preferred way would 
be to do a depth-limited search combined with an evaluation function (e.g., try looking only 5 moves 
ahead rather than full game), but you could also reduce the size of the board, hardcode certain 
number of initial moves to visit only a subset of the overall space etc. Justify your choice and report 
the findings. Similarly, training RL for connect 4 requires a large number of training episodes, so you 
might need to use techniques similar to the above to reduce the search/training space. Instead of 
playing against a semi-intelligent opponent, use completely random opponent, as it is easier to beat, 
so even somewhat trained RL agent should be performing better than random.  
Submission instructions 
Please submit a single zip file containing all python code, readme.txt with command lines use to run 
each of your algorithms, pdf of the performance analysis document, and the video of the demo. In 
addition, code for the functions (as text, not screenshot/image) containing implementations of the 6 
algorithms (2 games/3 algorithms each) need to be added as the appendices 1-6 to the document. 
Please note the maximum file size for the whole submission is 100mb, so you’ll need to lower the 
quality of your demo video if it defaults to more than this (or include only a link to a publicly 
accessible file). 
Additional Important Notes: 
- If reusing existing open source implementation of the games, make sure to credit it in your 
design document (including link to the repository). Make sure that the licence under which 
the code is distributed allows you to reuse it.  
 
- The metrics which to use to analyze the performance are not pre-specified, it is up to you to 
identify suitable metrics for each algorithm, and in the design document to justify your 
choices.  
- The purpose of the demo is to demonstrate that your code is fully functional and meets the 
brief requirements, in case we are unable to execute your source files due to compatibility 
issues. Please ensure that the video sufficiently captures this.  
- You are not allowed use any GenAI-generated text in the report. Feel free to use GenAI to 
enhance your understanding of the topics and algorithms, but any discussion in the report 
needs to be written by you and refer to specifics of your implementations and linked to your 
own results and graphs, rather than be generic GenAI content! TCD Policies on plagiarism 
and use of GenAI apply.  
 
